I have never been arrested never spent a
night in jail never had a loved one
thrown into the back of a squad car or
behind bars or be at the mercy of a
scary confusing system that it best sees
them with indifference and at worst as
monstrous the United States of America
locks up more people than any other
nation on the planet and Louisiana is
our biggest incarcerate er most of you
are probably like me lucky the closest
we get to crime and punishment is likely
what we see on TV while making
unpresentable I cuss cheela FEPs
before my son went to jail I used to see
people be on television fighting saying
oh this person didn't do it and this
person is innocent and you know you
snubbed them all you dismissed them and
I hear whatever don't get me wrong as a
lot of people deserve to be in prison
there's a lot of criminals out here but
there are a lot of innocent people
that's in jail Sheila's son McKinley is
one of those innocent people he served
17 years of a 30-year sentence on a
manslaughter charge
he had no previous convictions there was
no forensic evidence in the case he was
convicted solely on the basis of
eyewitness testimony and decades of
research have shown that eyewitness
testimony isn't as reliable as we once
believed it to be scientists say that
memory isn't precise it's less like
playing back of video and more like
putting together a puzzle since 1989
when DNA testing was first used to free
innocent people over 70% of overturned
convictions were based on eyewitness
testimony last year the district
attorney whose office prosecuted
McKinley's case was convicted of
unrelated corruption charges
when this district
attorney of 30 years step down the
eyewitnesses from McKinley's case came
forward and said that they'd been
pressured into testifying by the
district attorney's pressure which
included the threat of jail time
despite this McKinley is still in prison
before this happened I never would have
thought it well I guess it's hard for me
to imagine that these things is going on
you know until this happened to my son
it really opened my eyes it really
really opened my eyes saying a lot to
you estimates of how many innocent
people are locked up range between 1 and
4 percent which maybe doesn't sound like
a lot except that it amounts to around
87 thousand people mothers fathers sons
locked up often for decades for crimes
they did not commit and that's not even
counting the roughly half a million
people who have been convicted of
nothing those presumed innocent but who
are too poor to bail out of jail and
therefore sit behind bars for weeks upon
months waiting for their case to come to
trial or much more likely waiting to
take a plea just to get out all of those
people have family on the outside
my brother missed my high school
graduation because of the night before
my graduation he went to jail
my brother missed my birthday dinner
because that day actually he went to
jail my brother missed his own birthday
dinner because he was in a wrong place
at the wrong time
so all these times when he ended up
going to jail did were charges pressed
or did he just get taken home yeah the
charges will be pressed and it will have
a bond posted then the charges were
dropped because there was no evidence
I met Courtney Williams when I went to
her college classroom to talk about
imprisoned she ended up interviewing her
aunt
Troy Lynn Robertson for an episode with
everything that you went through with
your children what is any advice that
you would give me if I had any kids I
would tell you when you
you know the first thing they will
initially come to mind is love and
protection but I will tell you image
with the protection to raise them with
knowledge of the judicial system you
know we always tell our kids about the
boogeyman the bad people who to watch
out for but we don't teach them how to
watch out for the judicial system
because of the way our criminal legal
system disproportionately targets people
of color it's not uncommon for young
people like Courtney to know about it
when I started going into high schools
to talk to students about imprisoned I
found that roughly one-third of the
young people I spoke with had a loved
one behind bars the hardest part was
like finding out what he said or like
hitting on his court days yeah he went
to jail on my first birthday my dad
works as a guard eats on my uncle in
jail using it for life according to the
Annie E casey Foundation the number of
young people with a father incarcerated
rose 500% between 1980 and 2000 over 5
million of today's children will see a
parent incarcerated at some point in
their childhoods but this number
disproportionately affects African
American children by the time they reach
the age of 14
one in four black children will see
their dad go off to prison that's
compared to a rate of one in 30 for
white children one key factor
determining the future success of both
inmates and their children is whether
they can maintain ties during the
parents incarceration but prisoners
phone calls home can cost 20 to 30 times
more than regular phone calls so many
families keep in touch through letters
did before the making that big 16 to
share lol guess I'm not a baby anymore
you still taking me to prom I really
miss you you're the only god
I wish you were here so I can vent to
you so much has happened since the last
time I seen you I had some good news I
won first place in science for I'm the
geek we're gonna read your nose can't
you believe it high school is not about
super fast less than two years I hope
you'll be able to see me walk across the
stage I thought the right to you because
I know was born and now I want to put a
smile on your face Anissa wrote these
letters to her brother when she was a
sophomore in high school
she keeps the letters he writes to her
tucked into the frame of her bedroom
mirror and reads them over and over
again I'd like to think that there's a
good reason why anissa's brother is
locked up we all want the wheels of
justice to properly turn but we're
coming to understand that the lofty
ideals we learned in school look really
different in our nation's prisons and
jails and courtrooms you walk into that
courtroom and you're just you know I've
been doing this for quite a while and it
still catches your breath of like there
are so many people of color here and yet
I know that the city is not made up of
90% african-americans or why is it than
90% of the people who are in orange or
african-american public defender Danny
Engelberg isn't the only one noticing
how many black people are in Municipal
Court or in any court it's hard to miss
who's sitting in court waiting to see
the judge what do they look like mostly
african-americans like me it's mostly I
can say 85% black that's all you see in
orange in a box back there who locked up
who's waiting mostly black I mean
there was a couple of white people in
there I think was about 85%
I forgot American that was sitting there
how does a young black person growing up
in America today come to understand
justice another unpress install is about
a troupe of dancers who choreographed a
piece called hoods up which they
performed in front of City Council des
want a white was in the seventh grade
for that performance
we was wearing black hoodies because
Trayvon Martin and he was wearing a
hoodie and he was killed so we we looked
upon that and we said we going well
hoodies like to hold mine who came up
with that idea the group we all agreed
on it I was a little nervous but I had a
stick do it open I felt like it was a
good thing said he can notice what we do
she reveled Browne was another
choreographer and dancer and hoods up he
says the police criticized people who
look like him he feels judged based on
things other black people may have done
how would you want the police to look at
you and what would you want them to
think I think I'm not right why would
they think you're threatening your what
did you say you're 14 yes all 14 but how
do we because you see a lot of play a
lot of black males on dogs or gangsters
and all that but I want them to think
with that above me
for folks who look like me the easiest
and most comfortable thing to do is to
not pay attention to assume our criminal
legal system is working but if it's not
our responsibility to question those
assumptions whose responsibility is it
there's a synagogue here that's taken on
learning about mass incarceration and
many congregants have concluded that
because mass incarceration throws so
many lives into chaos it actually
creates more crime makes people less
safe congregate Terry hunter says the
first step towards action has to be
understanding she says it's crucial for
all of us to understand our connection
to this issue even if it's not
immediately obvious it's on our
shoulders to make sure that we're not
just closing that door and saying well
it's not us
you know it's not and I think is Jews
it's you know we've lived that history
it's not us and so if a society closes
their back on one section we've seen
what happens and so it is our
responsibility as Jews and as members of
this community to educate our community
at least at least our congregation to
the extent that we're able I've been
using the pronouns us and we because
this is our criminal legal system and
our children we elect the district
attorneys the judges and the legislators
who operate these systems for We the
People as a society we are more willing
to risk locking up innocent people than
we are to let guilty people go free we
elect politicians who fear being labeled
soft on crime encouraging them to pass
harsh legislation and allocate enormous
resources toward locking people up when
a crime is committed our hunger for
swift retribution has fed a police
culture bent on finding culprits fast
often without adequate resources to
conduct thorough investigations or
strict scrutiny of those investigations
we don't put checks on prosecutors
across the country over the last couple
of decades as property and violent
crimes have both fell the number of
prosecutors employed and cases they have
filed has risen prosecutors decide
whether or not to take legal action
against the people police arrest and
they decide what charges to file
directly impacting how much time a
defendant potentially faces behind bars
one check we do have on prosecutors is
defense imagine Lady Liberty the
blindfolded woman holding the scale
meant to symbolize the balance in our
judicial system unfortunately that scale
is tipped the majority of defendants in
our country are represented by
government appointed
attorneys these public defenders receive
around 30% less funding than district
attorneys do and they often have
caseloads far outnumbering what the
American Bar Association recommends as
Sheila Phipps said there are people who
belong in prison but it's hard to tell
the guilty from the innocent when
everyone's outcomes are so similar we
all want justice but with the process
weighed so heavily against defendants
justice is hard to come by our criminal
legal system operates for We the People
if we don't like what's going on it is
up to us to change it thank you very
much
[Applause]